---
layout: distill
title: Letters in Greek epigraphic landscape
description: a talk draft for a workshop at Universiteit Gent
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-05-29

authors:
  - name: Wang Banban
    url: "https://wangbanban17.github.io"
    affiliations:
    name: Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg
    
bibliography: 2023-05-29-Gent.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Introduction
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Epigraphic Landscape
  - name: Ephesos, new texts, new cityscape
  - name: Athens, new texts, old cityscape
  - name: Aphrodisias, old texts, new cityscape
  - name: concluding remarks
  - name: appendix
  - name: Footnotes

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

## Introduction

Goedemorgen !
It's my great pleasure to come back to Gent and also to participate in this great workshop, meet some old friends and talk about late antiquity.
I thank [Lieve](https://research.flw.ugent.be/en/lieve.vanhoof), [Marijke](https://research.flw.ugent.be/en/marijke.kooijman) and [Matthijs](https://research.flw.ugent.be/en/matthijs.zoeter) for the organisation and it's so nice to meet you all, especially after the tough COVID time which we all went through.
My talk today is a preliminary attempt to bring some methods from earlier periods and different areas to late antique epigraphy, especially Greek epigraphy.
At the same time, I hope to see what a *longue durée* perspective on late-antique public documents can help us understand civic mechanism in Greek cities, especially larger cities in developing a landscape of inscriptions.

## Epigraphic Landscape

Many Hellenistic and Roman cities in the Hellenophone were covered with a textile full of inscriptions.
While epigraphic practice declined to a certain extent starting from the third century onwards, the presence of inscriptions are still everywhere in late antique cities, even though new public texts were mostly found in large metropoleis.
It is against this background that epigraphers in the last decades talked more, in an archaeological glance, on the concept of *epigraphic landscape*.<d-footnote>On this topic, a good glance on the research stand is <d-cite key="ruiz2013Paisaje"/> on Roman epigraphy. In the Hellenophone, see<d-cite key="lasagniTropea2019Paesaggio"/> and the research project [Epigraphic Landscape of Athens](http://epigraphiclandscape.unito.it/index.php).</d-footnote>
The seemingly broad concept is roughly defined here as:

> part of a phenomenological system or an artistic installation, in which actors can only engage with inscribed artefacts that set up boundaries to limit and passes to enable movements and interactions.

Studies on the epigraphic landscape focus much on cities with a rich monumental and epigraphic presence: Athens, many well-excavated cities in the Latinophone west, Rome, and my dissertation on Hellenistic Delphi.
Such studies take a diachronic view of inscribing practice and examine how viewers in their own times could view, understand, and interact with inscribed artefacts (walls, steles, etc.) within its environments.

This can be understood in today's writing landscape as well: in Germany, for instance, any letter written in the form of DIN 5008 is considered *administrative*.

***

## Ephesos: cumulative texts in a changing landscape

Thanks both to its metropolitan status in *Provincia Asiae* and to the long and detailed excavations, Ephesos was an unescapable case on any serious discussion about public epigraphy in the late antique East, just like Delphi in the Hellenistic times.

Inscribed administrative letters in Ephesos are found in many places in the city.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ephesos_plan.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Plan of Ephesos in the third century, from <d-cite key="yegulfavro2019Urbanism"/>, Fig. 10.24
</div>

***

## Athens



## Aphrodisias



## Concluding Remarks



Thank you for your attention, and I'm looking forward to your questions, vos remarques, und Ihre Anmerkungen. 

***

## Appendix

| lemma | location | material description | location |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [*PPRET* 23](http://ppret-inscriptions.huma-num.fr/fr/inscriptions/ppret23.html) | Delphi | double-sided slab | unknown |
| [*IK Eph.* 1.41](http://ppret-inscriptions.huma-num.fr/fr/inscriptions/ppret28.html) | Ephesos | panel stele | near Embolos (reused nearby) |
| *IK Eph.* 1.42-43 | Ephesos | orthostate of a building | Heroön |
| *IK Eph.* 1.44 | Ephesos |  | |
| *IK Eph.* 4.1340 | Ephesos | | |
| *IK Eph.* 4.1345 | Ephesos | | |

<div class="caption">
    A list of inscribed official correspondences in late-antique Hellenophone cities, partly according to Feissel 2018.
</div>

***

## Citations

Citations are then used in the article body with the `<d-cite>` tag.
The key attribute is a reference to the id provided in the bibliography.
The key attribute can take multiple ids, separated by commas.

The citation is presented inline like this: <d-cite key="gregor2015draw"></d-cite> (a number that displays more information on hover).
If you have an appendix, a bibliography is automatically created and populated in it.

Distill chose a numerical inline citation style to improve readability of citation dense articles and because many of the benefits of longer citations are obviated by displaying more information on hover.
However, we consider it good style to mention author last names if you discuss something at length and it fits into the flow well — the authors are human and it’s nice for them to have the community associate them with their work.

***

## Footnotes

Just wrap the text you would like to show up in a footnote in a `<d-footnote>` tag.
The number of the footnote will be automatically generated.<d-footnote>This will become a hoverable footnote.</d-footnote>
